D. Food Ingredient Databases:
Accessible and comprehensive food ingredient databases are a benchmark for mobile applications meant to
enhance dietary choices and outcomes. It contains detailed data of food products, among which are the
ingredients, nutritional values, and potential allergens. [4] One such example includes the open source
database known as Open Food Facts, containing over 50,000 entries of food products present in 134
countries. [5] However, often, custom databases need to be created with regard to specific requirements so
that local food products may be covered. [8] 
One is PHARA, which uses a client-server architecture with a MongoDB database to implement
recommendations of healthy foods. The database contains items as well as user profiles. It feeds this
information into the application's recommendation engine whereby consumers marked out healthier foods
they liked and wanted by preference and need[5].
Another application is regarding ingredient analysis especially concerning food allergies. This is done using
a barcode scanner and OCR by scanning the ingredients against a food and health database having known
allergens. Ingredients scanned will alert the users on those materials that can cause allergic reactions. [5] 
ARFusion is the grocery shopping application enabled with AR based on a health-based model of nutrition,
and has personal and family profiles filled into it. It requires relating data from product database tracking
information of every product's ingredient, nutrient, and the location in the grocery, which information allows
the application to make real-time personalized recommendations on healthy products. [9] 
Moreover, the substitution of ingredients is performed using knowledge graphs. One such system was
created based on a knowledge graph called FoodKG which interconnected the ingredients with the food
ontology named FoodOn and even nutritional information by USDA. This system points out healthy
alternatives according to dietary restrictions. [10] 
Therefore, there is a great need to establish such comprehensive food ingredient databases that would be
accessible for consumers so that they might choose their foods wisely, where they would enjoy better habits
of consumption and general well-being. [4] 
E. UI/UX in Food-Related Mobile Applications: A Balancing Act
But of both, what shines through is the role that well-designed UIs and UXs play especially for the mobile
applications concerning food. Rather more salient considerations piling too much information on users or
taking them through complicated navigation is more nuisance to engagement and effectiveness resulting
from balancing clamor for quick and easy access of such applications. 
One of the ways through which complicated information can be made accessible is through visual, such as
color-coded tags and intuitive layouts. The result of the study was that the color-coded AR tags were very
easy for the users to distinguish between the healthy and unhealthy products. The developers of the
PHARA attempted to develop modular visual parts that would pass relevant information in a clear-cut
Cureus Journal of Computer Science
5 of 12
manner. Figure 8 of this source shows several layouts of PHARA in making food product information
understandable. [3]  
For example, the design of a mobile application concerning the ingredient analysis is essential to make sure
it becomes user friendly, considering there are food allergic users who might at some point require
assistance. The interface of the application focused on simplicity in daily use. [3] 
Therefore, developers have to face the specific functional-related issues pertaining to such applications. For
example, food scanner applications require one to scan the barcodes of each article purchased in the
market. It is cumbersome and time-consuming in the process. These features, combined with overall
information regarding nutritional content usually available, pose a burdensome job for the user to go through
the information and take the right decisions. [3] 
On the contrary, FOP labels present a much less complicated approach. FOP labeling acquires the real
simplified nutritional information on product packaging. This ease of access and processing becomes a
good reason why FOP labels are more effective in determining consumer choices compared to food scanner
apps. [11] 
Another great UI/UX is restaurant AR menus. With restaurant AR, the wish of the customers can be
satisfied with three-dimensional images of dishes and even whole lists of ingredients; the menu can be
interactive. The value of the information should be conserved rather than speed up the generation of the
content. In order to get success, the entire AR experience has to be intuitive as well as informative. [4] 
More generally, the sources emphasize that the development of successful food-related mobile apps will
require special attention to UI/UX principles. Balancing 'complexity' of features with the need for a seamless
user experience is key to user engagement and, in the end, the impact of the app toward changing users'
healthy choices.